


Internet Engineering Task Force                          M. Sustrik, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                                April 2011
Intended status: Informational
Expires: October 3, 2011


                Scalability Layer/Protocol Requirements
                        draft-sustrik-spreqs-01

Abstract

   This memo argues that a simple layer aimed at scalability is needed
   in the Internet stack and lists the requirements for such a layer.

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 3, 2011.



















Sustrik                  Expires October 3, 2011                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               SP Requirements                  April 2011


1.  Introduction

   Distributed computing have been around for a long time.  There is a
   wide range of solutions ranging from HPC to enterprise messaging.
   However, the landscape is changing.  In the recent years, thanks both
   to dropping prices of hardware and to the advance of cloud computing,
   the access to distributed computing infrastructure became commonplace
   and affordable for everyone.  Along with this development, the model
   of software-as-a-service is gaining traction, which means that the
   applications are not monolithic anymore, but delegate part of their
   functionality to other applications that live on the network.  Thus,
   mostly unnoticed, complex distributed systems emerge.

   This memo argues that old paradigm of complex, management-intensive
   and costly "distributed computing for the rich" does not apply any
   more.  In the world where a single freelance developer can easily
   hire a large cluster of boxes for what is basically pennies the old-
   school system of distributed computing infrastructure that takes
   weeks to set up and a dedicated team of administrators to run is not
   appropriate anymore.

   What's needed is a simple lightweight network layer for distributed
   computing that runs as smoothly and effortlessly as TCP and scales
   well enough not to break in the world where distributed computing is
   a norm rather than an exception.


























Sustrik                  Expires October 3, 2011                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               SP Requirements                  April 2011


2.  Requirements

   The distributed computing infrastructure proposed should meet the
   following requirements:

   a.  It should be part of the network stack.

       Placing it anywhere else (stand-alone application, new OS
       service, web service, etc.) raises the entry barrier above the
       acceptable level.

   b.  It should be standardised.

       The very nature of distributed computing calls for
       standardisation.  The system should work between different
       operating systems, programming languages, microarchitectures,
       across geographical and organisational boundaries etc.

   c.  It should scale effortlessly.

       With advent of distributed computing over the Internet (SaaS and
       alike) the traditional LAN-sized scalability is insufficient.
       Design of the system should guarantee that it won't break as
       number of participants grows and topologies extend accross
       network and organisational boundaries.

   d.  It should be capable of down-scaling.

       The system should scale down to the topology as simple as two
       nodes communicating each with another.  There should be no
       mandatory middle nodes (servers, brokers).  Obligatory middle
       node raises the entry barrier in terms of both complexity and
       cost to the unacceptable level.  However, it should be possible
       to add middle nodes to the topology at any time to scale it up to
       the desired size.  In other words, end-to-end principle should be
       observed.

   e.  It should duplicate no functionality.

       As a fully integrated part of the network stack, the system
       should provide no services that are available from other layers
       of the stack.  While the requirement sounds self-evident, the
       duplication problem is extremely severe with some distributed
       computing solutions and thus the requirement should be explicitly
       spelled out.

   f.  It should work with different L4 protocols.




Sustrik                  Expires October 3, 2011                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               SP Requirements                  April 2011


       To address the needs of different industries, the system should
       run on top of different L4 protocols: TCP (generic), SCTP
       (telecom), UDP (gaming), reliable multicast (financial services)
       etc.

   g.  It should be abstracted to a functional level.

       The entities handled by the system should reflect the function
       within the application architecture rather than lower-layer
       addressing schemes.  They should be "invoice processing service"
       or "NASDAQ stock quote feed" rather than "192.168.0.111:5672" or
       "this LAN".

   h.  It should be lower layer aware.

       The functional view as described above should be explicitly
       mapped to lower layer network entities.  That would make it
       possible to mechanically determine the function of the data on
       the network layer and thus allow for things like reporting packet
       volumes by function, traffic shaping by function, and perhaps
       even firewall requirements between functions.

   i.  The governance should be decentralised.

       One of the goals is to use the system for communication between
       organisations.  Given that few organisations are willing to cede
       the governance of their infrastructure to someone else, the
       governance model should be decentralised by design.  Each party
       should govern its portion of the topology with no party having
       power over the topology as a whole.

   j.  It should integrate with existing distributed computing
       solutions.

       There is no lack of solutions and protocols for distributed
       computing out there.  None of them, unfortunately, meets the
       requirements above (the end-to-end requirement seems to be the
       most significant obstacle).  To fully leverage the work already
       done in the area as well as the existing deployment base mappings
       from the proposed system to the individual deployed protocols/
       solutions should be defined, at least as far as it is possible.

       Two additional sub-requirements are:

   k.  The mapping should not require any change to existing
       implementations/protocols.  Rather it should define how to bridge
       it to the system proposed in this memo.




Sustrik                  Expires October 3, 2011                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               SP Requirements                  April 2011


   l.  Using the mappings, the system should be capable of joining
       heterogenous solutions/protocols into large scale topologies even
       though said solutions/protocols themselves may not provide mutual
       interoperability and/or unlimited scalability.















































Sustrik                  Expires October 3, 2011                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               SP Requirements                  April 2011


3.  Background

   These requirements are result of work on 0MQ project [1] as well as
   of ongoing work on Linux kernel implementation of scalability
   layer [2].














































Sustrik                  Expires October 3, 2011                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               SP Requirements                  April 2011


4.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.
















































Sustrik                  Expires October 3, 2011                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               SP Requirements                  April 2011


5.  Security Considerations

   This memo proposes a system for communication between multiple
   endpoints.  Thus, it does not map naturally to connection-based
   security mechanisms that assume exactly two endpoints.  Care should
   be taken to explain how security mechanisms offered by underlying
   layers can be leveraged in such a system and/or provide a guidelines
   for building security solutions on top of it.











































Sustrik                  Expires October 3, 2011                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               SP Requirements                  April 2011


Author's Address

   Martin Sustrik (editor)
   Stropkovska 9
   Bratislava  82103
   Slovakia

   Phone: +421 908 714 885
   Email: sustrik@250bpm.com










































Sustrik                  Expires October 3, 2011                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               SP Requirements                  April 2011


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2011).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Sustrik                  Expires October 3, 2011               [Page 10]

